---
layout: post
title: Parsing pharse in SQL
description: The explain of parsing pharse in SQL
date: 2024-09-14 22:22:00 -0800
tags: SQL
---

From performance tuning perspectives, it is very important to understand the concept of parsing. Parsing is primary pharse in SQL execution. It is followed by other stages: Execute and Fetch.

### PARSING BASICS

Whenever a SQL statement is executed, Database Engine performs below action on it:

1. Validate the syntax.
2. Validate the objects being referenced in the statement.
3. Privileges assigned to user executing the job.(Ensure that the user executing the statement has the necessary permissions and roles to perform the requested operations (such as SELECT, INSERT, UPDATE, DELETE, etc.)).
4. Verifying if statement is already available in the shared pool. The database engine will calculate the hash value for the SQL statement and look in.
5. If statement is not already present then allocate shared memory and create a cursor in shared pool.
6. Generate the Execution plan.

### TYPE OF PARSING

There are 2 types of parsing.

#### HARD PARSE:

> It means that statement is not available in shared memory or this is a brand new statement that user is trying to execute. If your shared pool is small then also hard parse may be required as the old statement got aged out the shared pool. All the steps mentioned above for parsing need to be done for this situation. Hard parse requires extra system resources. This is also known as `Library Cache Miss`.

### SORT PARSE:

> It means that statement was executed earlier and was already parsed and it availabe in shared memory. Most of database need to do steps 1-3 only as mentioned above since rest of the tasks were already done earlier. It is like work hard once and reap benefits multiple times. This is also known as `Library Cache Hit` as you got the statement parsed and available to use in the Library Cache.

<br>

### WHY HARD PARSES SHOULD BE AVOIDED

There are 2 key reasons why hard parses should be kept to base minimum required:
1. Generation of an execution plan is a very CPU-intensive operation.
2. Memory in the shared pool is limited and also memory operations are serialized. Memory operations happens using shared pool latches and if so many hard parses are happening then other processes in the database will have to wait in the queue to get the shared pool latch. So hard parse impacts both umber of shared pool latch and library cache latch.
